Datamover blog update for 1.2.x (#1087)
openshift/oadp-operator: blogs/data-mover/data-mover-1.2.0-overview.md

Reviewer: does it need to be in the html format?

Reviewer 2: I assume not.. probably based on author, drafted in hackmd and this is an export of that.

Author: The blog tooling is html not markdown 0/

Reviewer 2: So the only reason it's .md I assume is for preview purposes on GitHub.

<h2>Introduction</h2>

<p dir="auto">Data Mover provides portability and durability of CSI volume snapshots by relocating snapshots into an object storage location during backup of a stateful application. These snapshots are then available for restore during instances of disaster scenarios. This blog will discuss the different Data Mover components and how they work together to complete this process.</p>

<h2>What Is CSI?</h2>

> <p dir="auto">One of the more important components of Data Mover to understand is CSI, or Container Storage Interface. CSI provides a layer of abstraction between container orchestration tools and storage systems such that users do not need to be informed on the differences between storage provider's needs and requirements. It also provides point-in-time snapshotting of volumes.</p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<p dir="auto">One of the more important components of Data Mover to understand is CSI, or Container Storage Interface. CSI provides a layer of abstraction between container orchestration tools and storage systems such that storage vendors can develop a plugin once and have it work across a number of container orchestration systems. CSI defines an API for storage plugins to enable creation of a snapshot to provides point-in-time snapshotting of volumes.</p>
```

src: https://github.com/container-storage-interface/spec/blame/master/spec.md#L36

> <p dir="auto">CSI volumes are now the industry standard and are the storage backing for most Cloud Native applications. However, issues concerning CSI volumes still remain. Some volumes have vendor-specific requirements, and can prevent proper portability and durability. Data Mover works to solve this case, which will be discussed more in the next section.</p>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
<p dir="auto">CSI compliant storage plugins are now the industry standard and are the preferred storage plugin type for most Cloud Native applications including Kubernetes. However, issues concerning CSI volumes still remain. Some volumes have vendor-specific requirements, and can prevent proper portability and durability. Data Mover works to solve this case, which will be discussed more in the next section.</p>
```

Reviewer 2: src for in-tree driver deprecation: https://kubernetes.io/blog/2022/09/26/storage-in-tree-to-csi-migration-status-update-1.25/#timeline-and-status

<p dir="auto">You can read more about CSI<span>&nbsp;</span><a href="https://kubernetes-csi.github.io/docs/">here</a>.</p>

<h2>Why We Need Data Mover</h2>

> <p dir="auto">During a backup using Velero with CSI, CSI snapshotting is performed. This snapshot is created on the storage provider where the snapshot was taken. This means that for some providers, such as ODF, the snapshot lives on the cluster. Due to this poor durability, in the case of a disaster scenario, the snapshot is also subjected to disaster.</p>

Reviewer 3: NIT: ODF <-> ODF (OpenShift Data Foundation)

Author: thanks adding :)

> <p dir="auto">With volumeSnapshotMover controller, snapshots are relocated off of the cluster to the targeted backupStorageLocation (generally object storage), providing additional safety.</p>

Reviewer 3: NIT: volumeSnapshotMover <-> VolumeSnapshotMover

Author: thanks! fixed

<h2>OADP's Data Mover Roadmap</h2>

> <p dir="auto">The OADP team introduced the Data Mover feature in OADP-1.1.0 as a tech preview feature.  During the course of OADP-1.1 and OADP-1.2 development we have also been actively contributing to the upstream Velero project.  Our work in the upstream has focused on providing the foundation for the Data Mover feature directly in Velero.  We are pleased to see the upstream Velero project has officially adopted the feature and will release a <a href="https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/velero/wiki/1.12-Roadmap">built in Data Mover</a> in Velero 1.12. 

Reviewer 3: Maybe instead of linking he road map wiki, link the built-in datamover design ?

Author: The design is listed in the wiki, and provides slightly more context.  Sticking to the wiki :)

The Data Mover feature in OADP-1.2 will remain in tech preview as we continue to contribute to and evalute Velero's built in Data Mover for our customers.
<h2>Components</h2>

<h3><a href="https://github.com/openshift/oadp-operator">OADP OPERATOR</a>:</h3>

<p dir="auto">OADP is the OpenShift API for Data Protection operator. This open source operator sets up and installs Velero on the OpenShift platform, allowing users to backup and restore applications. We will be installing Velero alongside the CSI plugin (modified version).</p>

<h3><a href="https://github.com/vmware-tanzu/velero-plugin-for-csi">CSI PLUGIN</a>:</h3>

> <p dir="auto">The collection of Velero plugins for snapshotting CSI backed PVCs using the CSI beta snapshot APIs.</p>

Reviewer 3: VolumeSnapshot API graduated to v1 version: https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/storage/volume-snapshots/

Author: thanks!

<h3><a href="https://github.com/migtools/volume-snapshot-mover">VOLUMESNAPSHOTMOVER (VSM) CONTROLLER</a>:</h3>

<p dir="auto">The VSM controller is the CSI data movement orchestrator, it is deployed via the OADP Operator once the datamover feature is enabled. This controller has the following responsibilities:</p>

<ul dir="auto">
	<li>Validates the VolumeSnapshotBackup/VolumeSnapshotRestore Custom Resources.</li>
	<li>Makes sure that the data movement workflow has the appropriate storage credentials</li>
	<li>Performs the copy of VolumeSnapshotContent, CSI VolumeSnapshot and PersistentVolumeClaims from application namespace to OADP Operator namespace</li>
	<li>Triggers the data movement process and subsequently performs the cleanup of extraneous resources created.</li>
</ul>

<h3><a href="https://github.com/migtools/velero-plugin-for-vsm">VSM PLUGIN</a>:</h3>

> <p dir="auto">The upstream Velero plugin for the VolumeSnapshotMover(VSM) controller is to facilitate CSI volumesnapshot data movement from an OpenShift cluster to object storage, and vice versa.</p>

Reviewer 3: I would remove `upstream` in this sentence

Author: agree

<tr>
<td>ProtectedNamespace</td>
<td>The namespace where the Velero deployment is located, and PVC is copied to.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ResticSecretRef</td>
<td>A reference to a Secret CR that contains the credentials for accessing the restic repository, as well as a reference for the given BSL.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>VolumeSnapshotContent</td>
<td>The name of the VolumeSnapshotContent CR that represents the snapshot.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
<h2>VolumeSnapshotRestore (VSR)</h2>
<p>
A VSR represents a restore of a PVC from a snapshot. It can be used to restore a PVC from a VSB.
</p>
<table>
<thead>
<tr>
<th>Field</th>
<th>Description</th>
</tr>
</thead>
<tbody>
<tr>
<td>ProtectedNamespace</td>
<td>The namespace where the Velero deployment is located, and PVC is copied from.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>ResticSecretRef</td>
<td>A reference to a Secret CR that contains the credentials for accessing the restic repository, as well as a reference for the given BSL.</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>VolumeSnapshotMoverBackupRef</td>
<td>A reference to a VolumeSnapshotBackup CR that represents the snapshot that will be used to restore the PVC.</td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>

<h2>Backup Process</h2>
<div>
	

> The CSI plugin is extended to facilitate the data movement of CSI VolumeSnapshots(VS) from the cluster to object storage. When Velero backup is triggered, a snapshot of the application volume is created, followed by the associated VolumeSnapshotContent(VSC). This leads to the creation of a VolumeSnapshotBackup(VSB), which triggers the Data Mover process as the VolumeSnapshotMover(VSM) controller begins reconciliation on these VSB instances.<br><br>

Reviewer 3: I would add we create a VSB per VSC (1:1), just to add more color

Author: This leads to the creation of a VolumeSnapshotBackup(VSB) per VSC

> During the Data Mover process, the VolumeSnapshotMover first validates the VSB and then clones the VSC, followed by VS, and PVC to the protected namespace (default: openshift-adp). The VSM controller uses the cloned PVC as the dataSource and creates a VolSync ReplicationSource CR. VolSync then performs reconciliation on the ReplicationSource CR.<br><br>

Reviewer 3: Change `dataSource` <-> sourcePVC

Author: The VSM controller uses the cloned PVC as the source PVC and creates a VolSync
